Docs: Update guide on authenticating data source plugins (#24884)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/developers/plugins/add-authentication-for-data-source-plugins.md

+++
title = "Add authentication for data source plugins"
type = "docs"
aliases = ["/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/developing/auth-for-datasources/",  "/docs/grafana/latest/developers/plugins/authentication/"]
+++

# Add authentication for data source plugins

> This page explains how to authenticate against an third-party API from a data source plugin using the Grafana data source proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page explains how to authenticate against a third-party API from a data source plugin using the Grafana data source proxy.
```

Reviewer: Unclear antecedent. Which item is using the Grafana data source proxy, authenticate, the third-party API, or the plugin?

Author: > authenticate using the Grafana data source proxy

Not sure what a better option would be. Would a comma help before "using"?

> When a user saves a password, or any other sensitive data, as a data source option, Grafana encrypts the data and stores it in the Grafana database. Any encrypted data source options can only be decrypted on the Grafana server. This means that any data source that makes authenticated queries needs to request the decrypted data to be sent to the browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a user saves a password or any other sensitive data as a data source option, Grafana encrypts the data and stores it in the Grafana database. Any encrypted data source options can only be decrypted on the Grafana server. This means that any data source that makes authenticated queries needs to request the decrypted data to be sent to the browser.
```

> To minimize the amount of sensitive information sent to and from the browser, data source plugins can use the Grafana _data source proxy_. When using the data source proxy, any requests containing sensitive information go through the Grafana server. No sensitive data will be sent to the browser after the data has been saved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To minimize the amount of sensitive information sent to and from the browser, data source plugins can use the Grafana _data source proxy_. When using the data source proxy, any requests containing sensitive information go through the Grafana server. No sensitive data is sent to the browser after the data is saved.
```

Reviewer: Lots of passive in that last sentence.

Some data sources, like [Prometheus](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/features/datasources/prometheus/) and [InfluxDB](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/features/datasources/influxdb/), allow users to configure whether to use the data source proxy, through a setting called _access modes_.

## Add a proxy route to your plugin

> To forward requests through the Grafana proxy, you need to configure one or more _routes_. A route specifies how the proxy will transform outgoing requests. All routes for a given plugin are defined in the [plugin.json]({{< relref "metadata.md" >}}) file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To forward requests through the Grafana proxy, you need to configure one or more _routes_. A route specifies how the proxy transforms outgoing requests. All routes for a given plugin are defined in the [plugin.json]({{< relref "metadata.md" >}}) file.
```

Let's add a route to proxy requests to `https://api.example.com/foo/bar`.

1. Add the route to `plugin.json`.

   ```json
   "routes": [
     {
       "path": "example",
       "url": "https://api.example.com"
     }
   ]
   ```

1. In the `DataSource`, extract the proxy URL from `instanceSettings` to a class property called `url`.

   ```ts
   export class DataSource extends DataSourceApi<MyQuery, MyDataSourceOptions> {
     url?: string;

     constructor(instanceSettings: DataSourceInstanceSettings<MyDataSourceOptions>) {
       super(instanceSettings);

       this.url = instanceSettings.url;
     }

     // ...

   }
   ```

1. In the `query` method, make a request using [BackendSrv]({{< relref "../../packages_api/runtime/backendsrv.md" >}}).

   ```ts
   const routePath = '/example';

   getBackendSrv()
     .datasourceRequest({
       url: this.url + routePath + '/foo/bar',
       method: 'GET',
     });
   ```

> > You need to reload the Grafana server every time you make a change to your `plugin.json` file.

Reviewer: Is this a note? If so, it should start with "Note:" If not, then why is it indented?

Also, this information seems like it should be before you make changes to plugin.json rather than after.

## Add a dynamic proxy route to your plugin

> In the example above, the URL stays the same for anyone using the plugin. Let's look at how you can create dynamic routes based on data source options that are provided by the user.

Reviewer: By "anyone" do you mean "everyone"?

Author: I might? :)

Many of the properties in the `route` object can use templates in the form of `{{ .JsonData.YOUR_OPTION_NAME }}`, where `YOUR_OPTION_NAME` is the name of a property in the `jsonData` object.

```json
"routes": [
  {
    "path": "example",
    "url": "https://api.example.com/projects/{{ .JsonData.projectId }}"
  }
]
```

You can also access sensitive data in your route configuration by changing `.JsonData` into `.SecureJsonData`.

```json
"routes": [
  {
    "path": "example",
    "url": "https://{{ .JsonData.username }}:{{ .SecureJsonData.password }}@api.example.com"
  }
]
```

> Now that you know how to define routes for your data source plugin. Next, let's look at how to authenticate requests for your routes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you know how to define routes for your data source plugin. Next, let's look at how to authenticate requests for your routes.
```

## Configure the authentication method for a route

The Grafana proxy supports a number of different authentication methods. For more information on how to configure each authentication method, refer to [plugin.json]({{< relref "metadata.md" >}}).

For any sensitive data, make sure that you [Encrypt data source options]({{< relref "encrypt-data-source-options.md" >}}), and that you use `{{ .SecureJsonData.YOUR_OPTION_NAME }}` when using sensitive data source options in your routes.

> ### HTTP header

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add HTTP header
```

To add HTTP headers to proxied requests, use the `headers` property.

```json
"routes": [
  {
    "path": "example",
    "url": "https://api.example.com",
    "headers": [
      {
        "name": "Authorization",
        "content": "Bearer {{ .SecureJsonData.apiToken }}"
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

> ### URL parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add URL parameters
```

To add URL parameters to proxied requests, use the `urlParams` property.

```json
"routes": [
  {
    "path": "example",
    "url": "http://api.example.com",
    "urlParams": [
      {
        "name": "apiKey",
        "content": "{{ .SecureJsonData.apiKey }}"
      }
    ]
  }
]
```

> ### Token authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable token authentication
```

+++
title = "Add authentication for data source plugins"
type = "docs"

> aliases = ["/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/developing/auth-for-datasources/"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
aliases = ["/docs/grafana/latest/plugins/developing/auth-for-datasources/",  "/docs/grafana/latest/developers/plugins/authentication/"]
```

+++

# Add authentication for data source plugins

> This page explains how to authenticate against an third-party API from a data source plugin using the the Grafana authentication proxy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This page explains how to authenticate against an third-party API from a data source plugin using the Grafana data source proxy.
```

> When a user saves a password, or any other secret data, as a data source option, Grafana encrypts the data and stores it in the Grafana database. Encrypted data source options can only be decrypted on the Grafana server. In other words, once a password has been saved, no sensitive data will be sent to the browser.

Reviewer 2: True as long as access mode is not `Browser/Direct`

> Since the browser can't decrypt secrets like passwords or API keys, any external requests that need to be authenticated, need to go through the Grafana server. To make this process easier, Grafana offers a built-in proxy that intercepts outgoing requests, decrypts any secrets, and forwards the request to the original URL. Any data source plugin that needs to authenticate against an external service, or third-party API, needs to use the Grafana _authentication proxy_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the browser can't decrypt secrets like passwords or API keys, any external requests that need to be authenticated, need to go through the Grafana server. To make this process easier, Grafana offers a built-in proxy that intercepts outgoing requests, decrypts any secrets, and forwards the request to the original URL. Any data source plugin that needs to authenticate against an external service, or third-party API, needs to use the Grafana data source proxy.
```

## Add a proxy route to your plugin

To forward requests through the Grafana proxy, you need to configure one or more _routes_. A route specifies how the proxy will transform outgoing requests. All routes for a given plugin are defined in the [plugin.json]({{< relref "metadata.md" >}}) file.

Let's add a route to proxy requests to `https://api.example.com/foo/bar`.

> 1. Add the route to `plugin.json`. When you make a request

Reviewer 2: Don't understand what "When you make a request" means

   ```json
   "routes": [
     {
       "path": "example",
       "url": "https://api.example.com"
     }
   ]
   ```

1. In the `DataSource`, extract the proxy URL from `instanceSettings` to a class property called `url`.

   ```ts
   export class DataSource extends DataSourceApi<MyQuery, MyDataSourceOptions> {
     url?: string;

     constructor(instanceSettings: DataSourceInstanceSettings<MyDataSourceOptions>) {
       super(instanceSettings);

       this.url = instanceSettings.url;
     }

     // ...

   }
   ```

1. In the `query` method, make a request using [BackendSrv]({{< relref "../../packages_api/runtime/backendsrv.md" >}}).

   ```ts
   const routePath = '/example';

   getBackendSrv()
     .datasourceRequest({
       url: this.url + routePath + '/foo/bar',
       method: 'GET',
     });
   ```

> You need to reload the Grafana server every time you make a change to your `plugin.json` file.

## Add a dynamic proxy route to your plugin

In the example above, the URL stays the same for anyone using the plugin. Let's look at how you can create dynamic routes based on data source options that are provided by the user.

> Many of the properties in the `route` object can use templates in the form of `{{ .JsonData.YOUR_OPTION_NAME }}`, where `YOU_OPTION_NAME` is the name of a property in the `jsonData` object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many of the properties in the `route` object can use templates in the form of `{{ .JsonData.YOUR_OPTION_NAME }}`, where `YOUR_OPTION_NAME` is the name of a property in the `jsonData` object.
```

```json
"routes": [
  {
    "path": "example",
    "url": "https://api.example.com/projects/{{ .JsonData.projectId }}"
  }
]
```

> You can also used secret options in your route configuration by changing `.JsonData` into `.SecureJsonData`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also use secret options in your route configuration by changing `.JsonData` into `.SecureJsonData`.
```

```json
"routes": [
  {
    "path": "example",
    "url": "https://{{ .JsonData.username }}:{{ .SecureJsonData.password }}@api.example.com"
  }
]
```

Now that you know how to define routes for your data source plugin. Next, let's look at how to authenticate requests for your routes.

## Configure the authentication method for a route

The Grafana proxy supports a number of different authentication methods. For more information on how to configure each authentication method, refer to [plugin.json]({{< relref "metadata.md" >}}).

> For any sensitive data, make sure that you [Encrypt data source options]({{< relref "encrypt-data-source-options.md" >}}), and that you use `{{ .SecureJsonData.YOUR_OPTION_NAME }}` when using secret data source options in your routes.

Reviewer 2: Mixing secret and sensitive wordings in different places. Maybe stick with one, sensitive?
